Lab 1: Ethical Software Engineering

Fallbeispiel: Manipulationen
We (Florian, Sao Chi, Johanna) chose the "Fallbeispiel: Manipulation". It is about an employee of the company "CompanyRate". This company programms a rating system for banking companies. The employee listens secretly to a phone call of one colleague. Now he suspects him to work with the company "People’s Fruit Company" because on the next day he finds some new code in their program. This code is good for the "People’s Fruit Company". The colleague wrote a lot of other code. The employee doesn't know if the colleague is really illegally interacting with the company and wrote the new code to hide the suspicious one. Weeks ago, another colleague got fired because of something strange. The employee is in a dilemma right now.


Our discussion was about the trust and the manipulation in this example. We noticed, this project has a big impact on the economy, because investors from the banking sector, trusting it. If a company gets a higher ranking from the algorithm, its odds getting more investments will increase. Therefore, the interest of manipulating the algorithm towards one’s own advantage rises likewise.

First of all, the algorithm of such an enormous importance always needs to get reviewed by someone else in our view. Since the project holder has business interests in hiding the algorithm, because it is (or seems to become) the main product for making their profit, at least internally of the company it is obligatory, that the code must be checked. Thus, it is absolutely all right, that all the changes were analysed, even if there was no suspicion at all. We also suggest that software with high influence for the lives of many people (in this case the potential to harm other people economically), shall be inspected by a governmental or independent institution, in order to reduce the possibilities of manipulation.
Opinion Johanna:
I think that working together in a project automaticly means that all people in this project have to review the code. At least everyone has to understand why someone did something in the code. Otherwise they maybe do something twice or even against each other. The documentation of company code has to be very clear. In a company you program for the company and not for yourself. So it is not about keeping secrets or privacy. Reviewing code of colleagues is about a good workflow. The employee in our story did nothing wrong.


Next every employee had to subscribe an NDA (non-disclosure agreement) as part of the contract. It is not sure if each employee had to subscribe the same NDA. 

Opinion Johanna:
Of course an employee has to work for the company and subscribe that he will do nothing against the company. But in my opinion the NDA is always very difficult. Imagine there is something illegal written in the NDA. Could you do illegal stuff? Would it be ok to go against the law for your company?
Not talking about secret thing before releasing is not a hard thing, as it is very normal. Nevertheless when some does something against the law, I think it should not be covered by an NDA or the company.

opinion Johanna:
As I said before, when I am working in a company I do the things for the company. I know when I am in a room with many people and I can act like the company wants me to act. Of course everyone needs privacy. But therefor you have your home or maybe a little toilet room. In a big an busy office room it is normal when other people listen to your conversations. So I think the employee in our example did nothing wrong when he listened to his colleague. If there is something that none should hear the colleague should have gone into a room where none can access as easy as just walking through the door.

Time needed for this lab: we needed the time in the lab plus one hour each to write this report.
