Lab 1: Ethical Software Engineering

Fallbeispiel: Manipulationen
We (Florian, Sao Chi, Johanna) chose the "Fallbeispiel: Manipulation". It is about an employee of the company "CompanyRate". This company programs a rating system for banking companies. The employee listens secretly to a phone call of a colleague. Now he suspects him to work with the company "People’s Fruit Company" because on the next day he finds some new code in their program. This code is good for the "People’s Fruit Company". The colleague wrote a lot of other documentation code. The employee doesn't know if the colleague is really illegally interacting with the company and wrote the new code to hide the suspicious one. Weeks ago, another colleague got fired because of something strange. The employee is in a dilemma right now.


Our discussion was about the trust and the manipulation in this example. We noticed that this project has a big impact on the economy, because investors from the banking sector are trusting it. If a company gets a higher ranking from the algorithm, its odds of getting more investments will increase. Therefore, the interest of manipulating the algorithm towards one’s own advantage rises likewise.

First of all, the algorithm of such an enormous importance always needs to get reviewed by someone else in our view. Since the project holder has business interests in hiding the algorithm, because it is (or seems to become) the main product for making their profit, at least internally of the company it is obligatory, that the code must be checked. Thus, it is absolutely all right, that all the changes were analysed, even if there was no suspicion at all. We also suggest that software with high influence for the lives of many people (in this case the potential to harm other people economically), shall be inspected by a governmental or independent institution, in order to reduce the possibilities of manipulation if there is some kind of reasonable proof.

Working together in a project automatically means that all people in this project have to review the code. At least everyone has to understand why someone did something in the code. Otherwise they may be doing something twice or even something that conflicts with each other. The documentation of the company code has to be very clear. In a company you program for the company and not for yourself. So, it is not about keeping secrets or privacy. Reviewing code of colleagues is a good workflow. The employee in our story did nothing wrong when looking through the changes. That way the Source control systems are important to keep track of changes.


Next every employee had to sign an NDA (non-disclosure agreement) as part of the contract. It is not clear from the text if each employee had to sign the same NDA. 

Of course, an employee has to work for the company and sign an agreement that this person will not harm the company. However, the NDA is always very difficult, which is why our opinions differed in some aspects. Imagine there is something illegal written in the NDA. Could you do illegal stuff? Would it be ok to go against the law for your company for a lot of money?
Not talking about the final product before the public release is not a hard thing, as it is very normal. Nevertheless, when someone does something against the law it should not be covered by an NDA or protect the company.

Another topic was the actual behaviour of the employee as he had overheard a conversion. We agreed that we disagreed in this point as this was depending on the view of the person. One opinion was that it was super rude regardless of the content of the conservation. However, if you work for a company, it could be seen as duty to report something like this, especially when being in a room with many people where one should act like the company wants one to act.
Furthermore, while everyone needs privacy there are different ways to accomplish them. On one hand private matters should stay at home, on the other hand some privacy space in company should exist. In a big busy office room, it is normal when other people listen to other conversations which is where we agreed. So, in a sense the employee in our example did nothing wrong when he listened to his colleague. If there is something that none should hear the colleague should have gone into a room where none can walk easily through the door. However, he could have made himself noticeable as he knew that his colleague was inside.

Time needed for this lab: we needed the time in the lab plus one hour each to write this report.

